[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard,
and this is Mystery Teachings.
How do we get through those
difficult times in life
when we find ourselves in
a dark night of the soul?
How do we break through
to find the light again?
In this episode, let's
explore these questions
and discover ways to navigate
this most challenging part
of the alchemical process.
As a collective, we're in
the midst of a great shift
in human consciousness.
And our current
stage in this process
seems to be a dark
night of the soul.
If we want a breakthrough to our
greater potential and purpose,
there's really no way of
avoiding this dark night.
It's part of the alchemy.
So what is the dark
night of the soul?
Well, this is the
part of our journey
where we must conquer
our biggest fears
and come face to face
with what's called
the guardian at the threshold.
Now, that sounds
pretty intimidating.
But what does it mean?
Well, in some ways, it's
our defense mechanisms
that try to hold us back from
doing anything too risky.
And in other ways, it's
the projection of our fears
into the unknown.
But here, they stare back at us.
In order to pass
through this dark night,
we must have the courage to meet
our guardian at the threshold
head on and face our fears.
What happens when
we try to avoid it?
Well, so long as we keep
projecting our fears
and judgments onto other
things outside of us,
we're essentially putting
the face of our shadow side
onto others.
We're neither owning nor
recognizing our shadow.
Accepting and working
with our own shadow side
is absolutely necessary to move
through the dark night stage
and continue onward with
the alchemical process.
So what is the shadow side?
Well, in the work of Carl
Jung, the shadow side
is defined as the parts
of us that we haven't
accepted or acknowledged.
We either deny them.
Or we just don't believe
they're part of us.
The shadow side
includes things that we
don't like about ourselves
that we try to hide.
But it's not just the bad
things or the things we fear.
The shadow side also contains
many of our gifts and things
that we admire in others.
But we don't realize that these
qualities also exist within us.
For example, sometimes
we see other people
doing great things.
And we lift them
up on a pedestal.
But when we do the
same, we may not
recognize that we too are
capable of those great things.
We might not see it as
a gift that we have.
What we must realize is that
if we can admire it in another,
then it's also part of us.
The shadow side is
full of light and gifts
that we haven't yet acknowledged
or claimed within ourselves.
We have to accept that
these are part of us too.
If we judge someone as
less than or better than,
well, that means that we're
also judging ourselves
as less than or better than.
Only when we can stop
projecting it outwardly
and look inwardly,
and then accept this
is me can we then progress in
our transformational journey.
Maybe it's them.
But it's also me.
We're all one.
And the world is our mirror.
So we can ask, if I don't like
what I'm seeing out there,
what do I need to change
within me to shift it?
And if I like what I see within
certain people, what must
I do to reclaim it for myself?
Let's say there's
someone you admire.
And you want to be like them.
You want to do what they do and
have what they have, and so on.
Well, then ask, what did
they do to get there?
Then recreate that in your
own life using the same steps
and tools.
If it worked for them,
it can work for you.
So how do we work
with our shadow
and bring ourselves into a
state of greater wholeness?
Well, this is where the
real challenge begins.
It's that point where we begin
to recognize our own judgments,
fears, and anger.
And we become aware of the
ways that we separate ourselves
from others.
Now, when we start to face
this, our first reaction
might be to judge ourselves.
We start to not like
ourselves very much.
Or we might lose hope
or faith in the light.
Because all we see is dark.
This is the dark night
of the soul experience.
And it's a very
challenging place to be.
The good news is that it's
precisely within this shadow
that we can find the light
at the end of the tunnel
so to speak.
This is where we find the
fuel to make our gold.
Now, in alchemy, we talk
about turning lead into gold.
Lead relates to the
impure parts of ourselves
that we want to transform
and transmute into gold.
We want to bring this into our
highest potential, perfection,
and beauty.
And the idea is that we have
to go into the shadow to find
the raw materia, or the prima.
This is the essence
that has the most
potential to become the gold.
It's not going to be
found in the parts we're
conscious of already.
It'll be found in the shadow
side, the parts that are
hidden within the subconscious.
Why is that?
Well, it's because these
are our blind spots.
They're the parts
of us that we fail
to recognize within ourselves.
Or maybe we recognize them, but
we haven't accepted them yet.
And until we accept them
and learn to love ourselves,
even with those flaws,
they'll continue
to hide in the shadows of our
subconscious and control us.
Now, this is where
our work truly lies.
It's a profound
spiritual process
to come to honor, accept,
and reintegrate our shadow.
And this is essential to
us becoming whole again.
Does everyone have a shadow?
And where exactly does
the shadow come from?
Well, first off, yes, in
this physical density,
we all have a shadow.
And we divide ourselves
into an ego and a shadow.
Because our culture insists that
we behave in acceptable ways.
And as we're trying to
fit into social norms
and behave acceptably, we start
to suppress parts of ourself.
This is because we're culturally
and socially programmed.
And this then creates
the ego and the shadow.
Now, the way that we're
defining the ego here
is according to the
Jungian definition, which
is the conscious mind, thoughts,
and memories of ourselves
that we're aware of.
Now, in other episodes, we've
called this our positive ego.
And it relates to our self
identity and personality.
But our personality is also
influenced by our programming
and upbringing.
Now, where we get
into trouble here
is when we confuse our true
self with our personality.
As we reclaim our true self, a
big part of what we have to do
is strip away that
cultural programming
and start to question it.
We should ask ourselves,
is this really true?
Or is that just what I've
been taught to believe?
We all have things
that we're raised with,
like certain sayings we
heard a lot while growing up.
Things like, money
doesn't grow on trees.
Or just be happy
with what you've got.
Some of these might
even seem positive.
But think about the programming
that's taking place.
For example, when we say, just
be happy with what you've got,
it also implies that
we shouldn't want more
or strive for more.
And part of our
process is to look
at these belief systems,
or scripts, that
are playing out in our mind.
These are the things that
tell us what's expected
and what's acceptable.
It's all the ways
that were raised,
the things we're
taught to judge,
and how to fit in socially.
These are a big part of
what forms our shadow.
The shadow is all the
impulses and behaviors
that we've suppressed.
Because we were taught
they're unacceptable.
And we'd be judged for them.
So we need to reassess
these indoctrinations
and programming.
We also need to look at any
unresolved or unhealed traumas
from the past.
What happens is we create
fears and belief systems
as a result of those traumas.
And in order to cope, we
suppress parts of the trauma
and just try to
move on with life.
And those pieces that
aren't fully healed
get folded in to our shadow.
This may include false
beliefs about ourselves.
For example, we
buy into the idea
that we're not worthy
or good enough.
This then leads to low
self-esteem and low self-image.
But we have these great gifts,
great light, and great worth.
And yet, if we don't believe
that about ourselves,
then all of that
beauty and goodness
gets hidden in our shadow.
These are the things we
need to reassess and face
within ourselves.
Now, why is it so hard to
let go of these old programs?
And what happens when we
strip away the stories
that we've been told and start
to question and challenge them?
Well, in Kabbalah
for example, as we
go through the alchemical
process of ascending
the tree of life, we
eventually come to a point
where we're standing at
the edge of the abyss.
And this point on the
journey up the tree
coincides with that dark
night of the soul stage.
So imagine, you're standing
at this great abyss.
And on the other side of it is a
state of oneness and wholeness.
How do we get across
to that light?
Well, in order to get there,
we must shed the personality
and let it die.
We even have to shed
some of our individuality
in order to return to oneness.
And what's happening here
is that we're not just
being asked to let go of what's
limiting, or holding us back.
But sometimes it's
the things that we
think are good that are
slowing down our progression.
We may have
attachments to things
that have served us to a point.
But now, we're just
clinging to them,
because they feel
safe and familiar.
And letting go might mean losing
a core piece of our identity
and sense of who we are.
But what we're letting go of
here is not our true self.
It's our personality that's
been programmed through our life
experience.
And only when we let go
and let the personality
die can we reclaim our
true self-identity.
Now, the core fear
that we encounter here
is essentially a fear of death.
It's a fear of annihilation
and loss of identity.
We've come to this
place where we realize,
I'm not who I thought I was.
And the world isn't
what I thought it was.
We've been comparing
ourselves to some kind
of social standard.
And this is what we've been
programmed to accept and value.
But often, these are
based on a corrupt system
with its own wounding.
So it's not based
on universal truths.
We fight to fit in and
uphold this standard.
But then we start to
realize this isn't me.
We know we can't
keep up the charade.
But now, we don't
know what to do.
It's a loss of identity.
And when we lose that,
we go into a process
of self annihilation.
Or in alchemy we
call it fermentation.
This all contributes
to this experience
of the dark night of the soul.
So how do we get through this?
Well, once we
realize that we can
let go of who we thought we
were, in order to redefine
and recreate ourselves,
then everything changes.
We open up and trust.
We surrender to a higher power.
And we call that into
our life to help us find
our way through the darkness.
Even though we're in darkness,
and even though we don't
hear that voice of
spirit guiding us,
we must continue to trust.
Or we may not even know if
we believe in that right now.
But we must still come
to a point of surrender.
We have to trust that the
divine is still there.
Or that things will get
better, even if it feels silent
and like we're
immersed in darkness.
Now, at this stage of
fermentation in the soul,
it isn't a place to give in.
Surrendering is
different from giving in.
Giving in usually means
that we've lost hope
and are wallowing deeper
into the darkness.
Now, there is a battle
happening inside of us here.
A battle where we must
face our own darkness,
recognize that we're in it,
and pull ourselves through it.
We must hold on to hope and
trust in the light and divine
presence to guide us.
Trust that this divine
spirit is still a part of us.
Our divinity can be just as
much a part of our shadow
as the parts that we dislike.
For example, how many of us have
truly embraced the knowledge
that we are an
eternal being, that we
are the creator of our life,
and we are all powerful,
we are limitless?
How many of us have truly
accepted and claimed this?
To do so means taking
responsibility for our life.
And not many people really
want to be responsible.
So they deny their power.
We also need to realize
that the divine doesn't only
mean it's only good.
Maybe the divine also includes
those shadow sides of us
that we're rejecting.
We must accept that we
have both light and dark,
both good and evil within.
Our goal isn't to be
all one or the other,
but to stand in the
balance between them
at the fulcrum point, and to use
both in service to the greater
good.
This is how we wield
this towards progression,
towards the purpose that
we're here to fulfill
and the things
we're here to learn.
Now, finding the
fulcrum where we
can stand in that
balance point is what we
call living the middle pillar.
Our goal here is to
recognize that yes, I
have light within me.
And yes, I have darkness.
But neither of those
things define me.
I stand in the center.
Now, depending on our
relationship with our shadow,
we can either create a
heaven or a hell in our life.
Whatever we choose to
make out of this life,
it's coming from deep
within the subconscious.
Just like alchemy is
based on harnessing
the tension between
differences, our inner alchemy
is driven by this tension
between our ego and our shadow,
between the conscious
and the subconscious.
Now, this tension is
something that we can harness.
But we can only do that when
we stop projecting it outwardly
and start owning it inwardly.
Recognize this is me.
And the great work
is to know thyself.
So rather than
despising, denying,
or fearing those
parts of ourselves,
we can now recognize that
herein lies the potential gold.
Here, within the shadow,
there's great power.
And here is great possibility
for personal awakening
and breakthroughs, and
not only for ourselves.
If we want to make a
positive impact in the world,
we'll become far more effective
once we integrate our shadow.
Now, what might this
process look like?
Well, to give you
a sense of this,
I'll share a personal story.
At one point in
my journey, I was
doing a series of somatic
experiencing sessions
to release some unresolved
trauma within my body.
During some of these
sessions, I came face
to face with my guardian
at the threshold.
And with somatic
experiencing, we
engage our active imagination
and a certain level
of body awareness.
The practitioner
provides feedback
to help us get out of the story
and into those subtle body
sensations and imagery rising
up from the subconscious.
We were focusing on an area
of my back between my shoulder
blades.
And as I shifted my awareness
deeper into this area,
the first thing I encountered
was this guardian.
And let me tell you,
this was a grumpy,
hunchback looking character that
was rigidly clinging to a staff
to help hold it up.
And it had a rather unpleasant
and jaded temperament.
Now, as if that wasn't bad
enough, in one of the sessions,
I also realized
that this character
was guarding something else.
Now, some part of me that
I hadn't yet recognized,
or resolved, was behind it.
But before I could
discover what that was,
I first had to
face this guardian.
Now, as I listened
to this part of me,
I realized it was an
attachment to needing
to be strong and upright.
This part of me was working so
hard at doing that, that it had
become rigid and overburdened.
Now, as I accepted
my flaws and I
showed gratitude and
forgiveness, then it released.
And I was then able to
move beyond this guardian
and go even deeper.
Now, behind the guardian though,
was an image of a black tar
pit with an inky film on top.
And as I approached
it in my mind
I saw a hand reaching out of it.
I grabbed the hand to
try and help whatever
it was in that pit to come out.
But if I tried to pull it
out, it tried to pull me in.
And there was a struggle.
And as much as I
tried to pull whatever
it was out of into
the light, it equally
tried to pull me
into the darkness.
I realized this was a part of
my shadow side, a part of me
that I had rejected.
And as much as I was afraid
of going into that darkness,
it was afraid of
coming into the light.
It was afraid that if
it came into the light
it would be annihilated.
Because it's made of the dark.
And in that moment, I realized
I couldn't force my will here.
So what could I do?
Well, I discovered it
was there, because I
had been programmed with
a dualistic thinking that
created a split in my mind.
It was a result of a belief that
light is good and dark is bad.
Now, I intuitively
knew that I had
to bring love rather than fear
or judging to the darkness.
So I shifted from
this tug of war
to flowing love and acceptance.
And as I brought in this
love and acceptance,
it dissolved the darkness.
And there was a big
release that I physically
felt within my body and mind.
And what came out
of that experience
was a new awareness of my
own fear of annihilation.
It was very archetypal.
Now, trying to struggle
wasn't getting me anywhere.
Only love could come in
to neutralize and heal
that situation.
Love, acceptance, and compassion
that really is the key here.
We need to love ourselves and
realize that we're not perfect
and be OK with that.
We're not going to always meet
the expectations of society.
And other people aren't always
going to meet our expectations.
And that's OK.
When we continue to return
to love, compassion,
and acceptance, when we truly
and fully accept ourselves,
this brings us into an
integrated wholeness.
Now, what does it take to do
this work of facing the shadow
side?
Well, as you can
see from my story,
it was a highly symbolic
process that involved
the use of active imagination.
Another way we can
work with the shadow
is through dreams and visions.
Through these methods, we can
access the archetypal realm
of the psyche.
Our shadows exists
within the subconscious.
And archetypal
imagery can help us
access this deep inner place.
When we're dealing
with our shadow side,
there's usually going to
be a sense of antagonism.
Whether it's a
dream and that dream
then becomes a struggle,
or even a nightmare,
or rather than running away
from it though, or fighting it,
we need to face it
and not be afraid.
In the Kabbalistic
journey of ascending
the tree of life, when
we come to the stage
at the edge of the abyss, one
of the things we must talk about
is death.
What happens when we die?
In short, we go on.
We're not just this physical
body or this identity even.
We're so much more than that.
But in order to reclaim more
of the fullness of who we are,
we have to accept and let go.
We have to face our fears and
let go of the attachments that
hold us back.
We need to be willing to
sacrifice our identity and even
some of the things
that we value in order
to rise to something higher.
What is that something
higher that we're reclaiming?
Well, it's our wholeness,
our divinity, our eternity,
and our limitlessness.
In order to get
there, we really need
to walk forward into the
unknown with a sense of trust.
It's a sense of knowing
there is a divine source.
Or at least there's
something greater
that we're moving towards.
Now, contained
within the unknown
is infinite possibility.
As we move into it, we
can recreate ourselves.
And by reclaiming
our wholeness, we
can create a new and
better life for ourselves.
At this stage in the
spiritual alchemy process,
we'd go on a vision quest or
do some deep soul searching.
In order to tune in,
we need to shut off
the distractions that keep
us from facing whatever
it is that's going on inside.
We immerse ourselves into the
darkness, sometimes literally.
For example, initiates of
old would go into a dark cave
or use some form of
sensory deprivation
to move their awareness
deeper within.
Sometimes this immersion
is a metaphorical sense.
It's the darkness of the self
and the aspects of ourselves
that we have
rejected in the past.
Imagine for a moment that
you're going on a vision quest
out into the desert,
fasting and alone.
It's just you and nature.
And you have to
survive on your own.
So you find a spot
where you decide
to set space and do your
prayers and vision questing.
Now, as night falls, you
feel cold and hungry.
And you find that you have to
fight your own ego in order
to keep going.
It all comes up, doubts, fear,
judgment, anger, desperation,
temptation to quit.
All of this inner darkness
comes to the surface.
But you know you must
persevere through it
and not give in or give up.
And through this process, you're
conquering your lower self
and continuing to press forward.
Now, the big task is to
overcome the inner darkness
and not lose faith.
Now imagine yourself
in the position
of the hanged man in the
major arcana of the tarot
or as Odin who hung upside
down on the tree for nine
days and nights with no food or
water, wounded by his own blade
and bleeding onto the earth,
a willing self-sacrifice.
Feel how intense that is.
Odin hung there like that
for nine days and nights
before he spied
the magical runes.
A vision granted
to him by the gods.
Now, this is the fermentation,
or death, of the personality.
And it's not done until we
receive that divine vision.
It's not something we
can force or shortcut.
It must be earned by being
truly ready to sacrifice
our old identity and
submit to a higher power.
This is the point of
transition, of breaking
through that dark
night of the soul
and coming into the
enlightened state.
Now, the process is
not complete yet.
But we've made a
major breakthrough.
And next, we move into
refining and integrating
with our greater self.
In chemical and
physical alchemy,
this stage would involve
taking our solution
and putting it in a dark space,
like a closet or a cupboard,
with a slow gentle
heat warming it.
As it heats up, it rots.
And any parts that
are still corruptible,
experience a slow death.
As it rots, it then
releases the spirit.
And in alchemy, they also call
this process putrefaction.
Now, we'd let it sit in
that warm, dark place
with a slow gentle heat for
a couple of moon phases,
until it forms an
oily rainbow colored
film on the top of the ferment.
This marks a transition out of
what's called the black phase
and into what's called the
yellow phase of alchemy.
They also call this point of
transition the peacock's tail.
Now, everything that's
left is of a pure essence.
Dennis Hauck refers
to this stage
as the ray of the
spiritual warrior.
It's also known as
the shaman's death.
Now, once we make it
through this stage,
it's like we've
recreated ourselves.
Who we were before now feels
like a whole other lifetime
ago.
And we may go through this
kind of alchemical process
many times in our life.
Now, in the emerald tablet,
it speaks of this stage
by saying, "Thou shalt
separate the earth
from the fine, the subtle from
the gross, gently with much
sagacity."
Fermentation is sped
up through imagination
and through a willingness
to look deep within and ask
the right questions.
Through this process
we engage our shadow
and face it, rather than
running away from it.
We willingly walk into
the fire and allow
it to burn away the corruptible
aspects of the self.
Whatever remains after is
our pure essence that then
becomes our new foundation.
Let's go deeper into
a guided journey
to experience this process.
Start by closing your eyes
and take several deep breaths,
breathing in through the
nose and breathing out
through the mouth.
Relax each part of your
body beginning at your feet
and working your way up all
the way to the head and face.
And continue breathing as
you relax even more deeply.
As you relax your body, you
also allow your mind to relax.
And to further empty your
mind, imagine a river
running through your mind.
And send any thoughts
into the river
and let them be washed away.
As you enter your mind more and
more, become still and quiet.
And now allow yourself
to feel completely
relaxed and peaceful.
Come to that state of stillness,
emptiness, quietness within.
And now ask yourself
these questions.
What still needs to die within
me in order to break through?
And what knowledge do
I still need in order
to complete my transformation?
What knowledge of
myself do I need?
Now, as you hold these
questions in mind,
focus on the pause
between your breaths,
the silence between the words.
Connect to the stillness of the
gap, the space between things.
Be silent.
Be still.
Go inward for answers.
Seek deep within and let the
answers mature within you,
until something
rises to the surface.
Now, a spark ignites
within your heart.
And this spark grows into a
violet flame of transformation
and transmutation.
Let it grow within your heart.
Let it gently warm your
body with this inner fire.
Whatever this flame
touches, if it's
corruptible in nature in
any way, it will burn away.
But if it's incorruptible, if
it's part of your true essence,
it will be refined and
matured by this fire.
As the fire burns
away the dross,
everything that the fire burns
transforms into a golden light.
Within your aura,
within your field,
visualize all these
impurities being transformed
and transmuted by this fire,
until your aura becomes
flecked with gold.
And this golden aura
indicates that you
have raised up to a more
pure and refined state.
Now, also bring in the
heart flame of love,
or that Christ consciousness
ray, that energy and essence
of love.
And as this flame of
love, this ray, comes in,
it draws everything
together within you.
And all of those golden
sparks start to coalesce.
The golden sparks continue to
be drawn together until they
come into a singular point.
And this point becomes a
bright, golden light shining out
from the center of your being.
This flame of love,
wherever it touches
your light or your dark, it
helps to unify and bring them
into wholeness.
Let it flow through you.
Let it flow out into your aura.
And then let it
flow back in again.
Drawing everything together
into that single point
at the center of your being.
Continue focusing on this golden
light flowing through you,
emanating out, and then coming
back to the center point.
And now begin returning to
your waking consciousness,
taking your time.
Wiggle your toes and fingers.
And when you're ready,
gently open your eyes
remembering everything
from this meditation.
Now, this simple
visualization process
is something you can work
with on a daily basis
to support you with your
own personal transformation.
It's lighting that
gentle inner fire
that keeps the alchemical
process moving forward
through this stage.
Now, remember, it takes
the discipline and devotion
of daily practice to
move through this stage.
Patience is required of us
here while also holding on
to that inner knowing and hope
that we'll find our way out
of the darkness
and into the light.
As Kabbalists, we
have a statement
we use on a daily
basis to support
this practice in our life.
We say, I come out of the
darkness into the light.
I come with nothing.
I empty myself of all things.
I am an empty vessel.
I know nothing.
I have nothing.
I am no thing.
And therefore, I am ready
to receive all things
from the universe and
flow these in service
to the light to create a
better life and a better world.
Join me again as we explore how
energy flows from the source
through all the different
planes of vibration,
until it reaches the physical.
I'm Dr. Teresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring how to move
through the dark night
of the soul with me
in this episode of
"Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]